Add sequential workshop tutorial format (pick-and-place seed) (#5104)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/pick-and-place/03-static-positions.md

---
title: "Phase 3: Static positions and obstacles"
linkTitle: "3. Static positions"
type: "docs"
slug: "static-positions"
weight: 30
description: "Save the arm's key poses and configure obstacle components, proving the hardware and motion planning work before you add perception."
workshop: "pick-and-place"
toc_hide: true
phase: 3
phase_total: 6
time_estimate: "20 minutes"
prev: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/configure-resources/"
next: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/control-the-robot-from-python/"
languages: ["python"]
---

> In this phase you move the arm through the full pick-and-place sequence using saved poses, with no perception yet. The goal is to prove that the hardware and motion planning work before you add detection, so that any bug you encounter later has only one new cause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this phase you will teach an arm to move through a set of named poses that together form a pick-and-place cycle, and you let Viam's motion service create collision-free paths between them. First you will save each pose by hand, jogging the arm into position and recording where it is. Then you create obstacles so the Motion Service knows what to avoid when creating the collision free motion.
```

> {{< workshop-phases >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

toc_hide: true
phase: 3
phase_total: 6
time_estimate: "20 minutes"
prev: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/configure-resources/"
next: "/tutorials/pick-and-place/control-the-robot-from-python/"
languages: ["python"]
---

In this phase you will teach an arm to move through a set of named poses that together form a pick-and-place cycle, and you let Viam's motion service create collision-free paths between them. First you will save each pose by hand, jogging the arm into position and recording where it is. Then you create obstacles so the Motion Service knows what to avoid when creating the collision free motion.

## Why static positions first

When you add perception and motion planning at the same time, a failure could live in detection, the frame transform, the pose math, the motion planner, or gripper timing, and there is no straightforward way to tell which. Saving fixed poses lets you run the full hardware loop first. In Phase 4 you drive this same proven sequence from a Python script, and perception does not enter the picture until Phase 5. Once the arm reliably travels through every stage of the sequence, perception becomes the only new variable when you reach it.

> This is not just a classroom shortcut. Pose-to-pose motion without perception is a real production workcell pattern: any time a part always lands in the same spot, a fixed sequence of saved poses is simpler and more reliable than running detection on every cycle.

Reviewer: could consider removing

> The table below shows what each step in the static sequence validates:

Reviewer: Might want to add an intro paragraph that intros the poses and the states, the 3 charts are showing the states and the poses, but its not clear how they are related or how they are different, Might be more clear with an image?

Or flip it around and jump into using an arm position saver and do a test with it, then explain how you can use multiple of them?

| Pose          | Purpose                                                                                   |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| home-pose     | Observation position above the workspace; the wrist camera has a clear view of the blocks |
| approach-pose | Standoff directly above the pick zone, roughly 80 to 100 mm above the highest block       |
| grasp-pose    | At the block, gripper open and ready to close; fingertips are level with the block top    |
| travel-pose   | Safe carrying height that clears obstacles while holding a block                          |
| place-pose    | Above the bin where blocks are dropped                                                    |

The approach pose and the grasp pose share the same x and y coordinates. The only motion between them is straight down the z axis, so if the arm drifts sideways during the descent you have a frame or calibration issue to investigate.

## Save each pose with the arm position saver

You configure pose saving by hand, the same way you configured the arm, gripper, and camera in Phases 1 and 2.

> On the **CONFIGURE** tab, click the **+** icon and select **Blocks**. Search for `arm-position-saver`, select the `erh:vmodutils:arm-position-saver` switch model, and name it `home-pose`. This is the first model you use from the `erh:vmodutils` module, so `viam-server` downloads that module now; the same module also provides the `erh:vmodutils:obstacle` model you configure later in this phase, so it downloads only once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the **CONFIGURE** tab, click the **+** icon and select **Blocks**. Search for `arm-position-saver`, select the `erh:vmodutils:arm-position-saver` model, and name it `home-pose`. This is the first model you use from the `erh:vmodutils` module, so `viam-server` downloads that module now; the same module also provides the `erh:vmodutils:obstacle` model you configure later in this phase, so it downloads only once.
```

Reviewer: not sure on this one, it introduces a switch type silently and its not super clear what it is in this context. Switch is used several times below, so it might be good to introduce it or call the resources by their names or model names (home-pose or arm-position-saver)

> On the **CONFIGURE** tab, click the **+** icon and select **Blocks**. Search for `arm-position-saver`, select the `erh:vmodutils:arm-position-saver` switch model, and name it `home-pose`. This is the first model you use from the `erh:vmodutils` module, so `viam-server` downloads that module now; the same module also provides the `erh:vmodutils:obstacle` model you configure later in this phase, so it downloads only once.

Reviewer: erh:vmodutils:arm-position-saver triplet doesnt perfectly match the search, not sure if you want to change

Set one attribute:

```json
{
  "arm": "arm-1"
}
```

This attribute is also a dependency, the same way `gripper-1` depends on `arm-1`: the switch cannot save or recall a pose until the arm it points at is running.

{{< alert title="The arm will move" color="caution" >}}

> The steps in this phase move the physical arm, both when you jog it into position and when you set a switch to "go to" (position 2) to replay a saved pose. Keep the workspace clear and the e-stop within reach. Verify each pose individually before you run the full sequence at the end of the phase, since a pose saved in a bad spot is replayed exactly on position 2.

Reviewer: I don't think the switch positions are defined anywhere and can be confusing, Might need an intro or remove the reference to the switch positions. I think it would be better to remove them for the tutorial. might also be good to remove ", since a pose saved in a bad spot is replayed exactly on position 2."

{{< /alert >}}

With the `home-pose` switch added, save and verify it:

> 1. Open the **CONTROL** tab and find the arm test card. Set the **MoveToJointPositions** sliders and press **Execute** to jog the arm into position.

Reviewer: Might need a paragraph to refer back to the table and tell the learner they need to decide where a good home position should be, and that they need to manually jog the arm there, and check the camera frame to make sure they see the blocks

2. Under **MoveToPosition**, press **Current position** and note the x, y, and z values to confirm the arm is where you expect it.

> 3. On the switch test card, set the switch to **update config** (position 1) to save the current joint positions.

Reviewer: does update config auto save and do the values get pushed to the json config? might be worth mentioning since we have used save up until now

4. Set the switch to **go to** (position 2) to confirm the arm returns to the saved pose from any starting position.

> <!-- ASSET P0 control-armsaver-switch (UI+): arm-position-saver switch card with position 1 = save and 2 = execute annotated -->

Reviewer: image is super helpful, but might be good to include the json and explain what update config does.

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/pick-and-place/control-armsaver-switch.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="The arm-position-saver switch test card with its update config and go to positions.">}}

Now that `home-pose` is saved, open its resource card on the **CONFIGURE** tab and use the **Duplicate** feature to create a copy. Rename the copy to `approach-pose`, and its `arm` attribute carries over automatically since it is already set to `"arm-1"`. Duplicate three more times for `grasp-pose`, `travel-pose`, and `place-pose`. This is faster than adding five switches from scratch and less error-prone, since you only type the `arm` attribute once.

<!-- ASSET P1 configure-duplicate-feature (UI+): the resource Duplicate control highlighted -->

{{<imgproc src="/tutorials/pick-and-place/configure-duplicate-feature.png" resize="1200x" declaredimensions=true alt="A resource card menu with the Duplicate option.">}}

Run the same four save-and-verify steps for each of the four new poses: jog the arm into position, confirm it with **Current position** under **MoveToPosition**, set the switch to "update config" to save, and set it to "go to" to confirm the arm returns.

> {{< alert title="Switch positions" color="note" >}}

Reviewer: maybe consider moving this higher if the switch details are kept

On an `arm-position-saver` switch, position 1 saves the current joint positions and position 2 moves the arm to the saved pose. Position 0 is the idle resting state the switch returns to after a save or a move; it does not clear the saved pose. Always save with position 1 before you attempt position 2. Setting position 2 on an unsaved switch does nothing.
{{< /alert >}}

{{< checkpoint >}}

> Set each saved switch to position 2 in turn. The arm should move to each pose you saved. If a switch does nothing when you set it to position 2, you have not saved it yet. Set position 1 first, then try position 2 again.

Reviewer: checkpoint should probably individually review the arm position savers the learner should have and what each pose is, and tell the learner to move from pose to pose one at a time, and maybe to double check the camera location wrt the blocks before continuing?

{{< /checkpoint >}}

## Teach the planner about obstacles

The Viam motion planner is collision-aware, but it can only avoid geometry it knows about. Without any obstacle configuration, the planner avoids self-collisions only. Once you add obstacle geometry, the planner treats the table surface and the workspace boundary as hard obstacles it cannot plan through.

This matters both for correctness and for safety. Without the table obstacle, the planner might find a path that swings the arm through the table surface. Virtual safety walls at the workspace boundary also prevent the arm from swinging into people standing nearby. This is not just a classroom convenience: it is the same pattern you would use to keep a production workcell's motion planner honoring the real boundaries of its cell.

> In this workshop you configure two categories of obstacle: the table surface and two safety walls at the workspace boundary. Bin geometry is out of scope for this phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this workshop you configure two types of obstacles: the table surface and safety walls at the workspace boundary. 
```

## Obstacles as components

> An obstacle can be configured as an `erh:vmodutils:obstacle` component you add on the **CONFIGURE** tab, the same way you added the arm, gripper, and camera. This obstacle model uses the gripper API, so once configured, each obstacle shows up in `resource_names` as a gripper. That is expected; the model reuses the gripper API purely as a resource container for geometry, it does not add a real gripper to your machine.

Reviewer: instead of using obstacle, you can use generic with the geometry in the frame attribute to move away from the gripper api and make the copy / paste a little easier, it does feel odd to put geometries in the frame attribute though

Author: Yea this could be done as a generic component with everything configured in the frame but so many projects use the obstacle component from vmodutils, I want the learner to be familiar with that resource if they see it elsewhere.

> This will automatically include the geometry of the component in the World State used by the motion service to plan a safe path for the arm to a target position in 3D space.

Reviewer: this is so hacky it might be worth ignoring the type, learning probably wont notice?

### Measure your workspace

<!-- ASSET P1 photo-measure-workspace (PHOTO): tape measure on the table / measuring a boundary -->

Before you can fill in the obstacle geometry, measure your own table and workspace boundary. You need two kinds of measurement, and each one feeds a different part of the config:

> - **Tape-measure dimensions** for the box sizes: the table's length, width, and thickness go into the table obstacle's `x`, `y`, and `z`. Use the tape measure for how big each box is, not for where it sits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tape-measure dimensions** for the box sizes: the table's length, width, and thickness go into the table obstacle's `x`, `y`, and `z`. 
```

- **Arm-relative positions** for the box translations: jog the arm to a landmark, such as the front edge of the table or the safe working boundary behind the arm, and press **Current position** under **MoveToPosition** on the arm's CONTROL card to read the x and y coordinates in the arm's coordinate frame. These are the numbers that fill the `REPLACE_WITH_MEASURED_FRONT_X` and `REPLACE_WITH_MEASURED_BACK_X` placeholders in the safety walls below.

All obstacle geometry is expressed against the world origin, which in this setup sits at the arm base, so the x and y coordinates you read from **Current position** drop straight into the frame's `translation` fields without any conversion.

> Each obstacle is one `erh:vmodutils:obstacle` component with two parts. Its `geometries` attribute holds the box's `x`, `y`, and `z` **dimensions** (the full size in millimeters, centered on the component's own origin). Its `frame` places that component in the world: `parent` is `world`, and `translation` is where the box **center** sits relative to the world origin. An obstacle only appears in the 3D scene and the planner's world state once it has this frame. Two details trip people up:

Reviewer: this was confusing, it might be better to start with the 3d scene image below, and provide the screenshot or json config then explain the origin vs box size? It's safety related so I think we get a free pass on  just giving them the answer?

- The `z` in the geometry dimensions is the box's height, but the frame's `translation.z` is the box's **center**, not its top or bottom surface. A 30 mm thick table sitting flush with the world origin at `z = 0` needs a frame `translation.z` of `-15`, half the thickness, because the box extends from `-30` to `0` and its center is at `-15`.
- The safety walls are thin, tall boxes. A wall that is 600 mm tall has `z: 600` for its geometry dimension, but its frame `translation.z` is `300`, half the height, for the same reason.

### Add the table obstacle

<!-- ASSET P0 diagram-obstacle-geometry (DIAGRAM): box-center z-math (table 30mm z=-15; walls 600mm z=300; world origin at arm base) -->

```text
Vertical (z) layout — world origin z = 0 is the arm base, at table-top height:

>   +600  ── top of the safety walls

Reviewer: i think this might be more confusing than no ascii diagram

You can check your obstacle configuration against the companion repo's [obstacles-template.json](https://github.com/viam-devrel/pick-and-place/blob/main/config/obstacles-template.json), which has the full set with example measurements filled in. The full machine configuration, including all pose switches and obstacles, is in [machine-fragment.json](https://github.com/viam-devrel/pick-and-place/blob/main/config/machine-fragment.json). Treat both as references to check your work against, not as files to import over what you configured by hand.

## Test the full static sequence

<!-- ASSET P2 logs-clean-sequence (UI): LOGS with no collision errors after the run -->

From the **CONTROL** tab, trigger the pose switches in this order:

```text
home-pose (2) -> approach-pose (2) -> Open gripper ->
grasp-pose (2) -> Grab -> travel-pose (2) ->
place-pose (2) -> Open gripper -> home-pose (2)
```

The **Open** and **Grab** buttons are the same gripper controls you used in Phase 2: **Grab** closes the fingers on a block and **Open** releases it.

<!-- ASSET P0 static-sequence (MOTION): the arm running the full static loop home->approach->grasp->travel->place->home -->

> {{<youtube embed_url="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/7wRyUKvnjSg">}}

Reviewer: hopefully a netlify demo issue, but I couldnt watch the video in the web page, had to watch it on youtube

Reviewer: maybe consider putting the video at the top of this section, it helps frame the section really well

> As the arm moves, open the **3D scene** tab to watch its path alongside the table surface and the safety walls. The planner refuses to plan through configured geometry, so an obstacle conflict shows up as a planning failure in the logs, not as the arm passing through the obstacle. Open the **LOGS** tab alongside the 3D scene to catch any such planning failure in real time.

Reviewer: this feels like two different important paragraphs

{{< checkpoint >}}

> The arm completes the full sequence without stopping, the gripper opens and closes at the correct moments, and the LOGS tab shows no collision errors. If planning fails at a step, open the 3D scene tab to see what geometry the planner sees. Adjust the pose or the obstacle dimensions and retry. A common cause is an obstacle that is positioned slightly off from its physical counterpart, causing the planner to see the arm path as intersecting geometry that the physical arm actually clears.

Reviewer: maybe add "At this point"
Consider removing  "without stopping" and replace, but motions are triggered manually
Consider recapping the safety walls, collisions, and motion free path planning
